.. index:: code of conduct

.. _code_of_conduct:

LAVA Software Community Project Code of Conduct
***********************************************

Version 1.1 - September 2018

The LAVA Software Community Project (LSCP), the producer of the LAVA
Software, has adopted a code of conduct for participants. This is
intended to cover interactions and behavior everywhere within the
project, including but not limited to its mailing lists, IRC channels
and other modes of communication.

.. _code_of_conduct_be_respectful:

Be respectful
=============

In a project of any size, inevitably there will be people with whom
you may disagree, or find it difficult to cooperate. Accept that, but
even so remain respectful. Disagreement is no excuse for poor
behavior or personal attacks, and a community in which people feel
threatened is not a healthy community.

.. _code_of_conduct_good_faith:

Assume good faith
=================

LAVA Software Contributors have many ways of reaching our common goal
of reliable and scalable automated testing, which may differ from your
ways. Assume that other people are working towards this goal.

Also note that our Contributors and Maintainers may not be native
English speakers, or may have different cultural backgrounds.

.. _code_of_conduct_be_collaborative:

Be collaborative
================

LAVA Software is a large and complex project; there is always more to
learn within LAVA and automation. It's good to ask for help when you
need it. Similarly, offers for help should be seen in the context of
our shared goal of improving LAVA.

When you make something for the benefit of the project, be willing to
explain to others how it works, so that they can build on your work to
make it even better.

.. _code_of_conduct_be_concise:

Try to be concise
=================

Keep in mind that what you write once will be read by hundreds of
persons. Writing a short email means people can understand the
conversation as efficiently as possible. When a long explanation is
necessary, consider adding a summary.

Try to bring new arguments to a conversation so that each mail adds
something unique to the thread, keeping in mind that the rest of the
thread still contains the other messages with arguments that have
already been made.

Try to stay on topic, especially in discussions that are already fairly
large.

.. _code_of_conduct_be_open:

Be open
=======

Most ways of communication used within LAVA allow for public and
private communication. You should preferably use public methods of
communication for LAVA-related messages, unless posting something
sensitive.

This applies to messages for help or LAVA-related support, too; not
only is a public support request much more likely to result in an
answer to your question, it also makes sure that any inadvertent
mistakes made by people answering your question will be more easily
detected and corrected.

.. _code_of_conduct_problems:

In case of problems
===================

While this code of conduct should be adhered to by participants, we
recognize that sometimes people may have a bad day, or be unaware of
some of the guidelines in this code of conduct. When that happens, you
may reply to them and point out this code of conduct. Such messages may
be in public or in private, whatever is most appropriate. However,
regardless of whether the message is public or not, it should still
adhere to the relevant parts of this code of conduct; in particular, it
should not be abusive or disrespectful. Assume good faith; it is more
likely that participants are unaware of their bad behavior than that
they are intentionally trying to degrade the quality of the discussion.

Serious or persistent offenders will be temporarily or permanently
banned from communicating through LSCP's systems. Complaints should be
made (in private) to the administrators of the forum in question. To
find contact information for these administrators, please see the
documentation on getting support within LAVA.
